docs: add Qwen3.5 model guide and model-family hub (#2900)
NVIDIA-NeMo/RL: docs/guides/models/qwen/qwen3-5.md

# Qwen3.5

This page collects NeMo RL guidance for Qwen3.5 LLM and VLM post-training. Use it to
choose a starting recipe, install the dependencies needed for full performance, and
understand Qwen3.5-specific setup.

## When to Use This Page

Use this page when training or evaluating Qwen3.5 models, including:

- `Qwen/Qwen3.5-9B-Base`
- `Qwen/Qwen3.5-35B-A3B-Base` (MoE; LLM and VLM)
- `Qwen/Qwen3.5-397B-A17B` (MoE)

For family-wide Qwen guidance, see the [Qwen family hub](index.md). For the full list
of supported models, see [Model Support](../../../about/model-support.md).

## Support Status

> We track model support in two stages:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Model support is tracked in two stages:
```

| Stage | Meaning |
| --- | --- |
| **Functional Ready** | Runnable end-to-end and numerically validated with an initial training run. |

> | **Long-run convergence validated** | Trains stably over a full-length run with a healthy, reproducible reward curve. |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| **Functionally Ready** | Runnable end-to-end and numerically validated with an initial training run. |
| **Long-Run Convergence Validated** | Trains stably over a full-length run with a healthy, reproducible reward curve. |
```

below are the ones that have been **long-run convergence validated**. Other variants
and configurations are runnable but have not all been validated for long-run
convergence.

## What's Supported

| Model | Modality | Training backend | Parallelism | Inference |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| `Qwen/Qwen3.5-9B-Base` | LLM (dense) | Megatron | TP | vLLM |
| `Qwen/Qwen3.5-35B-A3B-Base` | LLM (MoE) | Megatron | EP + TP + CP | vLLM |
| `Qwen/Qwen3.5-35B-A3B-Base` | LLM (MoE) | AutoModel (DTensor) | EP | vLLM |
| `Qwen/Qwen3.5-35B-A3B-Base` | VLM (MoE) | Megatron / AutoModel | EP | vLLM |
| `Qwen/Qwen3.5-397B-A17B` | LLM (MoE) | Megatron | TP + PP + EP | vLLM |

Notes on backends and parallelism:

- **Megatron (MCore)** supports the widest parallelism for Qwen3.5 MoE, including
  Context Parallel (CP) for longer sequences (see [#2312](https://github.com/NVIDIA-NeMo/RL/pull/2312)).
- **AutoModel (DTensor)** supports Expert Parallel (EP). For Qwen3.5 MoE + CP on
  AutoModel, the TE backend plus `flash-linear-attention` is required; **dense
  Qwen3.5 does not support CP on AutoModel** (set `cp_size = 1`). See

>   [Performance: flash-linear-attention](#performance-flash-linear-attention).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **AutoModel (DTensor)** supports Expert Parallel (EP). For Qwen3.5 MoE and Context Parallel on
  AutoModel, the TE backend and `flash-linear-attention` are required; **dense
  Qwen3.5 does not support Context Parallel on AutoModel** (set `cp_size = 1`). See
  [`flash-linear-attention` Performance](#flash-linear-attention-performance).
```

## Example Recipes

The recipes below are example starting points. Recipe YAMLs under

> `examples/configs/recipes/` are the source of truth; check the YAML for the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The recipes below are example starting points. Recipe YAML files under
`examples/configs/recipes/` are the source of truth; check the YAML file for the
```

| Qwen3.5-35B-A3B-Base | LLM | DAPO-style GRPO | AutoModel | 4n8g | [`grpo-qwen3.5-35ba3b-dapo-4n8g-automodel.yaml`](../../../../examples/configs/recipes/llm/grpo-qwen3.5-35ba3b-dapo-4n8g-automodel.yaml) |
| Qwen3.5-397B-A17B | LLM | GRPO | Megatron | 32n8g | [`grpo-qwen3.5-397ba17b-32n8g-megatron.v2.yaml`](../../../../examples/configs/recipes/llm/grpo-qwen3.5-397ba17b-32n8g-megatron.v2.yaml) |
| Qwen3.5-35B-A3B-Base | VLM | GRPO | Megatron | 2n8g | [`vlm_grpo-qwen3.5-35ba3b-geo3k-2n8g-megatron-ep16.yaml`](../../../../examples/configs/recipes/vlm/vlm_grpo-qwen3.5-35ba3b-geo3k-2n8g-megatron-ep16.yaml) |
| Qwen3.5-35B-A3B-Base | VLM | GRPO | AutoModel | 2n8g | [`vlm_grpo-qwen3.5-35ba3b-geo3k-2n8g-automodel-ep16.yaml`](../../../../examples/configs/recipes/vlm/vlm_grpo-qwen3.5-35ba3b-geo3k-2n8g-automodel-ep16.yaml) |

> [!NOTE]
> Qwen3.5 thinking-mode and long-reasoning runs need a large generation budget. If
> `policy.generation.max_new_tokens` (and the matching `policy.max_total_sequence_length`

> > / `policy.generation.vllm_cfg.max_model_len`) is too small, the reasoning trace can

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> or  `policy.generation.vllm_cfg.max_model_len`) are too small, the reasoning trace might
```

> > be truncated before the final answer, and evaluation accuracy can appear near zero

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> be truncated before the final answer, and evaluation accuracy might appear near zero
```

> even when training metrics look normal. Use `max_new_tokens >= 8192` for reasoning
> tasks. See [#2725](https://github.com/NVIDIA-NeMo/RL/issues/2725).

> ## Choosing a Recipe

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Choose a Recipe
```

> ### Small LLM smoke run

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Small LLM Smoke Run
```

> Use the 9B Megatron recipe when validating setup, launch mechanics, logging, and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Use the 9B Megatron recipe to validate the setup, launch mechanics, logging, and
```

checkpointing.

```sh
uv run examples/run_grpo.py \
  --config examples/configs/recipes/llm/grpo-qwen3.5-9b-1n8g-megatron.yaml
```

### 35B-A3B GRPO (Megatron or AutoModel)

> Pick the backend you want to validate. Megatron supports the widest parallelism

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Select the backend you want to validate. Megatron supports the widest parallelism
```

(including CP); AutoModel uses Expert Parallel on the DTensor backend.

```sh
# Megatron (EP16 TP2 CP2)
uv run examples/run_grpo.py \
  --config examples/configs/recipes/llm/grpo-qwen3.5-35ba3b-2n8g-megatron-ep16tp2cp2.yaml

# AutoModel (EP16)
uv run examples/run_grpo.py \
  --config examples/configs/recipes/llm/grpo-qwen3.5-35ba3b-2n8g-automodel-ep16.yaml
```

For long-reasoning tasks, override the generation length explicitly:

```sh
uv run examples/run_grpo.py \
  --config examples/configs/recipes/llm/grpo-qwen3.5-35ba3b-2n8g-megatron-ep16tp2cp2.yaml \
  policy.max_total_sequence_length=9216 \
  policy.generation.max_new_tokens=8192 \
  policy.generation.vllm_cfg.max_model_len=9216
```

> ### DAPO-style GRPO (long reasoning, ready out of the box)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### DAPO-Style GRPO (Long Reasoning, Ready Out of the Box)
```

The 4n8g DAPO recipe already sets `max_new_tokens: 8192` and

> `max_total_sequence_length: 9216`, so it is a good starting point for long-reasoning

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`max_total_sequence_length: 9216`, and serves as a suitable starting point for long-reasoning
```

runs. See the [DAPO guide](../../dapo.md) for algorithm details.

```sh
uv run examples/run_grpo.py \
  --config examples/configs/recipes/llm/grpo-qwen3.5-35ba3b-dapo-4n8g-automodel.yaml
```

### Large MoE (397B-A17B)

> The 397B-A17B Megatron recipe targets 32 nodes (256 GPUs) with TP8 PP8 EP32 and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The 397B-A17B Megatron recipe targets 32 nodes (256 GPUs) with TP8, PP8, and EP32 and
```

`max_new_tokens: 8192`.

```sh
uv run examples/run_grpo.py \
  --config examples/configs/recipes/llm/grpo-qwen3.5-397ba17b-32n8g-megatron.v2.yaml
```

### VLM (Geo3K)

> The VLM recipes target the Geo3K task. They train the vision tower per their

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The VLM recipes target the Geo3K task. They train the vision tower according to their
```

`freeze_config` (see [Model Quirks](../../../model-quirks.md)).

```sh
uv run examples/run_grpo.py \
  --config examples/configs/recipes/vlm/vlm_grpo-qwen3.5-35ba3b-geo3k-2n8g-megatron-ep16.yaml
```

> ## Performance: flash-linear-attention

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## `flash-linear-attention` Performance
```

Qwen3.5 relies on `flash-linear-attention` (FLA) and `causal-conv1d` kernels for
full speed. There are two distinct cases:

- **Performance fallback (AutoModel / DTensor).** Several `nemo-automodel` kernels
  dispatch to FLA when it is importable and fall back to slower PyTorch
  implementations otherwise. Without FLA, Qwen3.5 (dense or MoE) trains roughly **2x

>   slower** on the AutoModel path, with no error. The `-megatron` recipes use MCore

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Performance fallback on AutoModel and DTensor.** Several `nemo-automodel` kernels
  dispatch to FLA if it is importable and otherwise fall back to slower PyTorch
  implementations. Without FLA, Qwen3.5 (dense or MoE) trains roughly **two times
  slower** on the AutoModel path, without raising an error. The `-megatron` recipes use Megatron Core
```

  kernels directly and are not affected. See
  [#2722](https://github.com/NVIDIA-NeMo/RL/issues/2722) and
  [#2324](https://github.com/NVIDIA-NeMo/RL/issues/2324).

> - **Hard requirement (AutoModel Qwen3.5 MoE + Context Parallel).** When

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Hard requirement for AutoModel Qwen3.5 MoE and Context Parallel.** When
```

  `context_parallel_size > 1` for a Qwen3.5 MoE model on the AutoModel backend,
  NeMo RL requires FLA and raises `ImportError` if it is missing (see the `import
  fla` guard in `nemo_rl/models/automodel/setup.py`). CP for Qwen3.5 MoE on
  AutoModel also requires the TE backend; **dense Qwen3.5 does not support CP on

>   AutoModel** — set `cp_size = 1`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  fla` guard in the `nemo_rl/models/automodel/setup.py` file). Context Parallel for Qwen3.5 MoE on
  AutoModel also requires the TE backend; **dense Qwen3.5 does not support Context Parallel on
  AutoModel** (set `cp_size = 1`).
```

> [!NOTE]

> > The container does not yet install FLA in the AutoModel worker venv by default.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> The container does not yet install FLA in the AutoModel worker virtual environment by default.
```

> The root-cause fix is upstream [Automodel#1894](https://github.com/NVIDIA-NeMo/Automodel/pull/1894),

> > which moves FLA out of the dev-only group so `nemo-automodel[moe]` pulls it in;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> which moves FLA out of the dev-only group so that `nemo-automodel[moe]` pulls it in;
```

> tracked on the NeMo RL side by [#2324](https://github.com/NVIDIA-NeMo/RL/issues/2324).

> > Until that bump lands, install it in the AutoModel venv:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> Until the update is integrated, install the package in the AutoModel virtual environment:
```

>
> ```sh

> > pip install flash-linear-attention

Reviewer 2: might need to specify more specifically how folks can update if they aren't familiar. IIUC, i think this is what you want to do:
```
python-DTensorPolicyWorkerV2 -m pip install flash-linear-attention
uv run run_grpo.py --config foobar.yaml
```
disclaimer: untested ^, but is just the flow

Author: Hi @terrykong this `pip install flash-linear-attention` thing is no longer valid because with the automodel bump up we did for 0.7.0, the library is now by default installed. The doc content will be updated to reflect the latest behavior.
